My name is Donald Davis. I was born in Kings Road in Llanderby on the 5th of the 4th of 1932.
I went to school in the Infant School, which is the oldest school in Llanderby.
And then when I became old enough I went to the Central School and stayed there until I was 14 years of age.
I don't remember really of the actual starting of the war, but we lived in Kings Road.
And after a number of years of the war Swansea was being bombed by the Germans.
And we could see from our home in Kings Road the glow of the oil works in Llandarcy, which was well alight at that time.
And the south part of it we could hear the bombings of Swansea itself and the sounds then of the Heinkel bombers, which had a humming noise.
And it was like this, hmmm, hmmm, hmmm, which sounded like as if they were driven by diesel engines.
I'm not quite sure whether they were diesel or petrol, I'm not quite sure.
But Swansea was really well alight and as far as we were concerned in Kings Road we could very well have been able to read a newspaper.
Because of the light the Llandarcy oil works gave off being well alight.
The work itself in Swansea, later on after the bombings we went down to Swansea and we could see all the rubble which was strewn everywhere.
And I think bulldozers must have been going along to clear a way through the rubble.
And that was to us, it was just being well only about 12 years of age then.
But during that time it was an exciting outing basically.
But only we weren't old enough to realise what really was going on.
During the war, as far as my father was friendly with a gentleman called Mr. Harro Lee who lived in Llandaerlore Road in Llandebier.
And he had to go to Morrison Hospital to get medical attention.
And next to him in bed was a German, either a pilot or a member of an aircrew or what he was, I'm not quite sure.
But he must have been able to speak English because Harro Lee asked him how did he manage to bomb Swansea so accurately.
And he said that it was comparatively easy for them.
All they had to do was to fly over Llandebier.
And there is, well there was during that time, a furnace in the lime firms in Llandebier.
And that was well alight at night and it had the glow you could see for miles, not only from up but even in the village it was quite alight.
So what the gentleman in the hospital said to Harro Lee was that he flew over Llandebier, found that furnace well alight.
On a nice clear evening he was able to pick out the railway lines that he knew about possibly leading towards Swansea.
All they had to do was to follow the sheen on the railway tracks themselves, the lines, and follow it all the way down to Swansea.
And then they bombed the city itself.
And then I remember them seem to be coming back the same way and then turning as they got to Llandebier, they seem to be turning towards Carmarthen over a place called Broad Oak.
And we were told later on that the air crew must have either had too many bombs left so they let go five bombs over towards the Broad Oak area.
I've never heard anything of that, whether that was true or not, but I've never heard any stories from that date this regarding the bombs creating any damage or anything over towards Broad Oak.
Now during the time that Mr. Lee was in hospital, he obviously gathered all this information and when he returned home he reported the whole matter to the police.
And within a couple of weeks after the whole furnace was covered over with a big steel canopy like the head of a mushroom which hit the whole glow of the furnace itself.
So that was well done Mr. Lee.
As was expected, the traffic on the railway line during the war was quite heavily occupied by trains going up and down the line.
And we as children, we were quite interested in the tanks and armaments that were going up, but I never saw them coming down again towards Shrewsbury or Llandaillot and Shrewsbury area.
But then later on, quite often these American soldiers were being transported past the railway station in Landerby.
So being her children, we were quite interested in American chewing gum. So we all as boys together, we all stood on the railway gates and shouted, any gum chap.
And we could see as the train went by, the packets of chewing gum, Wrigley's chewing gum was being thrown out.
So as soon as the train passed, we were like little rabbits running around the place looking for the bits of packets of chewing gum.
And that was the start of basically us thinking of the American soldiers being in the area.
From time to time then, in the village, there was a dance in the memorial hall and the American soldiers seemed to be invited there.
And quite nicely, and we could see them enjoying at one time until there was a fight on the square with some of the locals.
And obviously it was a sad day to see everybody fighting on the square near the church.
And this gentleman had been to the chip shop above all things. He had all must be fishing ships.
And as he came from the fishing chip shop, could see this fight and with about, well, it must be eight to ten people fighting on the square.
He got entangled with the fight and as far as the chips were concerned, they were all strewn all over the floor right across.
And that was sad to me because, you know, they were coming to help us and you get a few people that were after a couple of pints of beer.
And everybody seemed to be the enemy and they didn't realize it, but this is what happened.
And unfortunately then, after a couple of weeks, my parents invited a couple of American soldiers into Sunnyhurst in Kings Road.
My mother was quite a lovely lady really, although I say it myself.
During the war then, she always said, I'll have to be kind to people, to soldiers, because when my boys might have to go to the war, I hope somebody will look after them.
And unknowns to her, this is what happened.
And there were Italian prisoners in Landeby.
Germans were in, I think, Llandarog.
And but we had an Italian prisoner in Gambica Farm. His name was Luigi Fontana.
And the police one night on Saturday evening came to see my parents and being Catholics, asked us to take Luigi to the Catholic Church in Ammanford and escort him there and escort him back to our house.
And then he was returned to the farm in Gambica.
And of course, he was a very smart ex-policeman prior to him going to the, being called up in the army.
He was a very smart person. He became a prisoner in Tunis.
And his friend, who was another prisoner in Llandeby, his name was Ernesto Masse.
He was a tank commander, a sergeant, and they both used to come and stay in our house and just have a cup of tea and somewhere to go.
And my mother was quite entertaining.
We were all a family together basically.
And one night on a Friday night, just before Christmas, we used to call Ernesto Masse Dino.
That was, seemed to be his nickname.
And on this Friday night, there was a knock on the back door.
And my mother went to open the door.
And Dino was there with a big brown paper bag.
And he said, present, Mama, present.
And when she looked into the bag, it was, there must have been about 40 or 50 sparrows there, dead sparrows.
So my mother said, take them back, you cruel thing.
I don't want them. Take them back.
And the object of him bringing the sparrows to my mother's house was that being Christmastime in Italy,
they set bird cages in the Alps to sing.
They started singing.
And then unfortunately, other birds came along and bang, bang, bang.
That's how they trapped them.
And so then they garnish the turkey with sparrows, little bodies basically.
But my mother was quite shocked.
And do you know how to take them, what he did with the sparrows?
We'll never know because ever since he went back to Italy and he went to Australia,
but I still pray for him every night.
I pray for them all.
Another day in, Dino Ernesto Marseille was coming up the road.
And we were all out on the front.
And he was so excited, coming towards my mother's home and our home,
that he had this letter in his hand.
And he said, look, look, Maria, letter from Maria.
Look, look.
And he knew very well that we couldn't understand what was written on the letter
because it was all in Italian.
He said, look, mama, feel it.
He said, so feel the letter.
And he was so excited.
And later on, after his return, all Italians, they went back.
So my parents and myself went to Milan to visit Dino and his wife Maria.
They had a son called Gianfranco.
Now that, unfortunately, was the last time I saw him.
And he went back to, as I've already said, he went back to, emigrated, I think, to Australia.
And I think he died there.
And I have tried to trace Gianfranco.
They lived in Via Pizzano Moderno in Milan.
But I haven't had any joy getting hold of them at all.
But another prisoner was Guido Bonato.
I went to Padoa with my parents.
We traced him through our friend Luigi Fontana.
He took us there to meet Guido Bonato.
He was quite a good-looking man and very reserved.
And he introduced us to his wife.
And she was working in a spa center.
And we said hello and goodbye.
And that was the last time I saw Guido Bonato and his wife.
And they, as I've said, they lived in Verona.
We heard on the radio that the war was over.
And my mother immediately asked Dennis, my brother, my twin brother, and myself, to run down the village.
Quick, quick, quick, she said.
Go to the vicarage and ask the vicar to ring the church bell.
And tell him to ring it straight away because the war is over.
And so we went down.
And I can see the vicar now.
He was a big, very big man.
His name was Mr. Davis, Vicar Davis.
And within, by the time we got home, the bells were ringing.
And that, I think, was the first time they were running after the war.
Because during the war, the bells were not allowed to chime at all.
So then everybody started to have the party sort of atmosphere.
And there was street parties.
And everybody seemed to be so happy.
But sadly, the war in Japan hadn't ended during that time.
So then, of course, then became, I think, BJ Day, victory in Japan later on.
I'm proud to say that I'm still in contact with the Fontana family.
Fontana being the Italian prisoner, I'm quite proud to say that I'm still in contact with his wife.
Her name is Irene.
She is now 96 years old.
She has a daughter, Elsa.
When we first came out of the Army, my parents and I went to Italy.
Elsa was only about five then.
And then she had, Irene had a daughter, another daughter called Elda, a son called Flavio.
And now they're all married and they live in the Vicenza area in Italy in a village called Marlo.
Each and every day, every Sunday, I speak to them on WhatsApp.
And we have a long chat.
And it's so nice to be able to see them all.